# Dissertation  -Data Analysis and Model Comparison in Heart Disease Prediction

Globally, Heart disease is a significant health problem. It is crucial to find it early and treat it right, but old ways based on just medical records are not always accurate. This study aims to predict heart disease using various machine learning models and to evaluate the impact of different preprocessing techniques on model performance. The dataset underwent two primary preprocessing strategies: removal of outliers and log transformation of outliers. Following this, the data was balanced using SMOTE and Near Miss methods. Subsequently, it was subjected to a mix of label and one-hot encoding and scaled using the Min-Max scaler. Four classifiers: Logistic Regression (LR), Gradient Boosting (GB), Random Forest (RF), and Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB) were applied to the resampled data and their evaluation was performed using 5-fold cross-validation, focusing on metrics such as precision, recall, F1 score, accuracy, specificity, Receiver Operating Characteristic(ROC), True Positive Rate(TPR) and False Positive Rate(FPR). Both preprocessing methods: removal of outliers and log transformation yielded robust results, but their effectiveness varied depending on the metric. For instance, The Random Forest model on resampled data using SMOTE method, was the most accurate, especially when odd data points were removed. For reducing false diagnoses, the Gaussian Naive Bayes model applied to Near Miss resampled data (post-log transformation) emerged as the most effective. Conversely, when the objective was to identify as many potential heart disease cases as possible, the Gaussian Naive Bayes model, paired with SMOTE resampled data (with outlier removal), outperformed the rest.
